{{{
  "title": "First!",
  "date": "Aug 10, 2013"
}}}

This first entry is a meta-post - a description of the architecture of this blog. Anyone can sign up for a free wordpress or tumblr account and begin their logorrhea within seconds, but where's the fun in that? <!--more-->

This blog is an [ember.js](http://emberjs.com) single-page app, served up by and consuming a restful API from an [express](http://expressjs.com/) server, all hosted by [heroku](http://www.heroku.com). These technologies are best utilized in conjunction with a Mac laptop in a fair-trade coffeeshop, skinny jeans with a dangling key ring, a fixie bike, and an air of superiority.

The code for this blog (including this post and all future posts) will be on [github](https://github.com/ahaurw01/haurwitz.com). Copy it, fork it, gain inspiration from it, or publicly condemn it.

### The posts

Each blog post is written in its own file and versioned alongside all the other code for this site. I'm comfortable with markdown syntax, so that's what the posts are written in. I took inspiration from Jordan Santell's [Poet](http://jsantell.com/post/getting-started-with-poet) project for the post metadata. At the beginning of each post should contain JSON wrapped in triple curly braces with a minimum of two properties: a title and a date.

```
{{{
  "title": "Learn this one simple trick to lose 500 lbs fast!",
  "date": "Jan 01, 2100"
}}}
```

If I want to have some subset of the text to show as the introduction to the post on the main page, I'll put `<!--more-->` inside of the post text at the point I want to cut.


### The server

The express server isn't working too hard. It has two capabilities:

  - Serve up static files
  - Serve posts in a restful manner

The static part is easy- I just use the cool middleware `app.use(express.static('my/public/directory'));`. This serves up the html, css, javascript, and assets.

The restful endpoints are `/rest/posts` and `/rest/posts/:postTitle`. The handlers for these are very simple. They just serve up either all cached posts or the one that matches the title given. I decided to make a human-readable title the unique identifier of the post so that you can view a url like `www.haurwitz.com/#/posts/50-fruitcake-recipes-in-50-days` instead of a nondescript `www.haurwitz.com/#/posts/17`.

When the server boots, it will scan a certain directory for blog post files and caches each one as an object in an array. This is when the metadata JSON is parsed and the `<!--more-->` tag is searched for. It does not watch the directory for changes to the blog posts, but that's ok since getting the files to the heroku deployment means doing a `git push heroku master` and redeploying the app anyway.

### The front end

Ok, this is what gets the ladies. 

`index.html` lists the stylesheets and javascripts needed and also houses the handlebars templates that drive the whole site. Should the site grow, it would be wise to separate the templates into distinct files and compile/concatenate them before deployment.

To show you how simple handlebars can make things, here is the entire template for this page:

```
<script type="text/x-handlebars" data-template-name="post">
  {{#linkTo 'post' this}} <h2 class="post-title">{{title}}</h2> {{/linkTo}}
  <span class="post-date">{{date date}}</span>
  <div class="post-full">{{markdown body}}</div>
</script>
```

`app.js` contains all the javascript code necessary to boot an ember application, define routes, our blog post model, and a couple handlebars helpers for rendering markdown with showdown.js and dates with moment.js. Those two helpers can be seen in practice above. Again, should there come a time when not all of the javascript for the entire webapp can fit without scrolling my text editor, it would be a good idea to modularize and use some sort of build tool like grunt or brunch.

`app.css` contains any styles I want that bootstrap 3 doesn't give me. Like the modularization that would be possible with the templates and javascripts, it can be nice to use a CSS preprocessor like SASS, LESS, or stylus, which will transform some fancy css-like code into css at build time. This allows for more modular and maintainable styles.

### What's next?

I plan to add commenting with [disqus](http://disqus.com/) or a similar service so that those unfortunate enough to stumble across this can complain about it. I'm not a fan of spinning up a backend for simple projects, nor making people create yet another user account for some idiot's blog just to pen the modern equivalent of bathroom poetry.

Also I'll need to make the app crawlable to snare those unfortunate souls.

<3